As we came around the roundabout,
that's on the right-hand side
by gas station and all these
people were gathered around,
and as my vehicle came
up, people were really waving us over.
So, we finished the roundabout and came out
and I got off.
People were pointing me over
towards the canal.
What's, I don't have an interpreter
with me right now.
I don't travel with one.
So, you know "what's wrong?"
And people are pointing
down into the water
and there's this guy who spoke English,
who came up behind me,
and said, "Girl in the water".
"What, you telling me
there's a girl in the ?" And there's nobody
in the water looking for her, right?
There's one guy that's got like dirt
on his pants, up to his knees.
But it...
There's a girl,
there's a girl in the water.
So, I jumped in.
I mean, to help. What do you mean. This
girl is in the water, nobody in the water.
So, I jumped in.
My gunner was right behind me
'cause he'd gotten off with
me as well to see what was wrong.
So, I jumped in the water and
the water is actually up,
it came up to my chest
as he jumped in, filthy shit,
filthy, filthy stuff.
And what it is, it was right beside,
it's like a culvert
that goes under this water, right?
Because I mean, the main road
you go off of it and there's a culvert
that goes in, and maybe
100 meters, maybe?
No, you know what?
It seemed like that, but it wasn't.
This can only be about 50, right?
If that, 25.
But it goes underneath
the road and it's got a wide opening.
So, the cement, I mean, the top
of the cement actually came up to my chin,
just below.
That's where the cement is.
There's no metal grating, right?
It goes down on it.
And then, of course, it goes under water,
so it narrows down, right.
so the wide opening in the
narrowed right in.
So, you know, but just, whatever...
And the water was all the way up
to the top of the, of this culvert
that goes in, right?
So, it's completely submerged.
So, I'm looking around,
I'm trying to get the story at the same
time, well, there's a girl in the water.
So, I start searching with my hands, right,
bending down in the stuff,
searching with my hands
'cause I can't feel anything
under the culvert.
And so, I move back to the other direction,
trying to think, maybe this girl is there.
And I'm looking at this,
and there's nobody there.
And what had happened
was, there's this little girl, was about
Oh my... I found her, I guess,
maybe three, four years old,
and she'd gone to the edge
'cause everybody's playing there, right?
And there's a little bit of a market
there.
She'd gone to the edge to relieve herself
and her brother, who was with her,
and the uncle was away.
There's like a little step ditch
that's just before it drops off.
So, that's where you can stand.
And she had gone there and the brother told
"So, what are you doing?"
She said : "You go away."
Alright, "I'm a girl. I got to go
to the washroom, go away."
And when she didn't come back,
he turned around
and... she wasn't there.
So, she'd lost her balance
and she'd fallen into the water.
So, that's what we were saying,
she'd fallen in.
And I look up, and the uncle is there,
'cause he's the one taking care of her,
and he's holding a flip flop.
Because she fell in,
but they found her flip flop.
So, that's where they knew where she fell
in. But I'm looking. I'm going
"Maybe she got scared
'cause I can't feel anything."
So, we grabbed a rope.
My gunner was about to jump in the water
with me.
I said, "You're not getting in this
water, man, right?
I'll just, one, is that enough?
You stay there and you stay dry."
My driver stayed up to communicate
the base, trying to get some help.
And I said, I need a fire department.
I need somebody to
help me get the water down.
We tied a rope to...
He had a rope
and I tied a rope to my arm
and I started diving underneath,
to get underneath the culvert.
Reaching out, you know,
holding my breath and reaching out,
trying to see what I can hold and feel.
I couldn't find anything.
So, I just kept hoping. I was, "well,
maybe she's not there" and we took out,
you know, our,
the device where, you put it on the ground
to hold up the camouflage netting, right,
so you can keep it off the vehicle.
Put a bunch of those together,
and I was putting that through
to try and see if I, first of all, to see
if it went all the way through,
and to sort of see if there's any grating.
And maybe I could move something
and feel if there's anybody.
And I didn't have any weight.
I didn't feel anything.
And if she was there,
I was hoping that she just got scared
and ran away right and we'd,
and I couldn't find her.
So, I was there for,
I would say, the first 45 minutes
I was in the water in and out
of the water, going back and forth,
trying everything I could, diving back
in, searching again on my hands and knees,
trying to find, all these people
standing around it.
Nobody else, nobody else in the f****g
water, with me trying to help.
So, doing all of this,
I mean, my weapon is, I mean,
my frag[mentation] vest is gone.
My weapon is still on me.
And I couldn't,
I couldn't find anything.
I'm rambling, sorry.
It took a lot of time, right?
And I finally got out, and I'm
just looking around. She's not there.
She must have gotten scared
and ran off and everything's fine.
And part of me is really hoping
that she's not there because, I mean,
just, there's no way she's alive, right?
Not after the first ten minutes.
And that, that's the thing
that's really scaring me.
The fire engine finally came,
but they couldn't
get their equipment to work,
to start draining the water.
So, I got back in the water.
Because, so, at least, the fire trucks here
were starting getting down.
The only way I'm going to know for sure is
I got to get underneath.
I've got to go underneath the road
because I need to know.
If the girl's in there, you just
can't leave here there, right?
You've got to do something.
So, I was convinced by this point
that she wasn't there because I figured
I've done everything I can
and there's no way she's underneath.
So, we... so, the fire trucks
finally started pumping out water,
and I was going back and forth again.
I mean, again,
I'm the only damn guy in the water,
jumping back and forth from the two sides
and we're finally getting down the water.
And just as we got it down, just enough
on the one side where all
the filth was, that I could see that
there's a bit of light on the other side.
I went over to the other side
and I started crawling underneath
and going on my back,
just so I could keep my nose above
the water, swimming backwards.
And then it just kept getting a bit lower,
and I was able to at least
keep my head up a little bit as I went
through, crawling in this culvert.
Oh, and I mean, there's...
the filth and the silt is all underneath
right at the bottom of the circle.
And that's what I'm crawling in
and feeling it.
I can still taste it, right now.
And she wasn't there.
I'd gotten all the way down
to the end.
I had another five,
maybe five meters to go.
And I was calling out to my gunner, Eric,
who had gone from one side to the other.
God, he was phenomenal.
And he says, "Yeah, I'm still here.
No, no coming out. No, not."
And I was five meters away
and I put out my hand,
and she bobbed to the surface.
And she couldn't have been
more than two inches away from when I dove
first time after her.
And she...
she had black hair,
and a pink shirt.
Her eyes were closed.
Uh... I couldn't believe that
she was there, so...
I remember
just picking her up and cradling her.
Zaya came out.
Eric knew that I'd found her
because I said, "Oh shit".
And I just sat on the edge,
I had her and I just broke down.
I mean, it was about two hours late
and I've been in the water for about two
hours now, straight.
She's about the same age
as my little girl at the time.
- What was the reaction of the locals
after all this?
- The gas station attendant was,
who was right there,
he was amazing.
As I stood there
and they'd taken the little girl away,
and I was trying to figure things out, they
Um, I mean, there are people
all around me, and still,
the crowd was still there and they were
picking the garbage and the feces,
and everything off of me and my uniform,
and he led me away.
And as he's leading me to the gas station,
I mean, I had to take a knee
and I started to break down
and he shooed everybody away,
you know, to give me some privacy.
And then he took me into his gas station
and he fetched fresh water, and he and his
men and everybody around him
poured water over me to clean me off.
And I'll always remember that.
And when I went back, just before I left,
he was there.
And he embraced me like a friend.
You know, we shared something.
And there was a woman who came by
and who spoke
to a reporter who was with us
and asked if I was the soldier
that went in after the little girl.
I don't know if because she was there,
she'd heard about it.
The only thing that I can think of is,
I mean, it was a horror.
That's something that I'm
always going to remember,
and I don't know
if I really dealt with it yet.
And I don't think I've,
I probably haven't reconciled the fact
that there was good things that came
out of it. But... That the Afghans
maybe at least saw, for two hours,
a Canadian coalition soldier
that spent time in the water,
with our uniform and our flag,
trying to do something.